ReadMe for AppleX 2013 Update
Updated April 2013

Release Notes and Other Stuff That Should Be In A ReadMe
--------------------------------------------------------

Additional Directory Structure - AppleX\PROGRAMS
------------------------------------------------

For the AppleX 2013 update, I have separated the directory structure for
non- trivial Graphics and other non-trivial Demo Programs and placed them
under AppleX\PROGRAMS. None of these were ever included in AppleX before
now, and all have been written since late Fall of 2012 with the exception
of a couple of the utilities and some demos from the Apple33 DOS 3.3
Aztec C65 cross-compiler distribution. Those have been completely
rewritten and are much improved.

Graphics Mode Support Extended
------------------------------

AppleX now Supports

LGR - Lo-Res
DLGR - Double Lo-Res
HGR - Hi-Res Color and Monochrome
DHGR - Double Hi-Res Color and Monochrome

4 of the subdirectories in the AppleX\PROGRAMS directory are related to
the 4 main graphics modes of the Apple II (see above), and each contains
source code, programs, utilities, documentation, and disk images related
to working with the AppleX Aztec C65 distribution and Graphics on the
Apple II. All 4 graphics mode are supported at a pretty similar level. Until the
2013 Apple X update, support for Apple II graphics was limited, with 
a huge focus on HGR color, because that's what I knew best.

HGR support is still stronger than the rest in specialized areas because
AppleX provides all the tools I wrote and used many years back in
conjunction with full-blown projects to do such things as loading
graphics libraries into Axiliary memory and other related stuff. But each
of the 4 graphics modes provide image loaders, line drawing routines, and
font routines and so forth.

And most importantly (to me), AppleX comes with documented methodology
and toools to aquire bit-mapped graphics from a variety of sources
including Windows, Apple II Native Format, and Hybrid Sources like
AppleWin Screen Captures of running programs that make obtaining graphics
for use in your own programs easy if not too easy.

Robust Documentation Much Expanded
----------------------------------

Please read the source code and documentation, and run the demos and
programs you find in each AppleX\PROGRAMS\subdirectory as well as any
documentation you find laying about for more information.

The immensely expanded source code in the AppleX\GRAPHICS directory is
also a good reference for more information. This is the source code for
the G2 (Graphics) library, which also includes the source code from the
original Aztec C65 G.lib.

Comprehensive documentation for Aztec C itself and its original toolchain
has been available in pdf format user's manuals from the Aztec C website
at www.aztecmuseum.ca for a number of years now. But with this release of
AppleX and with many pdf "tutorials" and users manuals being very much
expanded-on especially for Apple II graphics programming, new life has
been breathed into this old compiler, taking its capabilities far beyond
the Apple II Community's "Retro-Compiler" perception... until AppleX, all
that was available was a previous ProDOS native-mode shell version that
does not even support creating floating point SYS programs, so if this
perception is not clearly incorrect, it is somewhat understandabley
incorrect.

Aztec C is not as efficient in some areas as other cross-compilers for
the Apple II, but when it comes to documentation and usability demos it
holds its own, even today, 25 or so years later, and more than
compensates for whatever inefficiencies it mat have by providing a stable
and feature-rich environment which includes the documentation by Manx
Software (available from the website at www.aztecmuseum.ca) supplemented
with what AppleX provides.

The source code for the compiler itself was apparently lost long ago
according to Aztec C's founder, so we can't make changes that would be
considered modern to its style, which is transitory K&R and not ANSI or
ISO, but all the library source is available, and it is the library
source that I have been modifying and expanding on to provide the AppleX
improvements to Aztec C, in the same manner and spirit I first expanded
it over 20 years ago.

Tools and More Tools
--------------------

The AppleX\TOOLS directory also contains many utilities. Some are also
related to Graphics, but some were written long ago. The utilities in the
subdirectories under the AppleX\PROGRAMS directory have all been
recently written, and are more specifically targetted at today's working
environment. For that reason, they have been placed there instead of in
the TOOLS directory.

ProDOS Directory Services
-------------------------

The AppleX\PROGRAMS directory also contains a subdirectory called
LISTDIR which demonstrates and implements G2 library routines related to
reading ProDOS disks and finding files on them and so forth.

Command Line and Unix-Like Programs for ProDOS
----------------------------------------------

Another expansion of the AppleX distribution is the production of
programs that run under the Aztec C Shell for ProDOS 8. Shell Versions of
SYS programs, which are PCODE mixed with native 6502 code. allow command
line arguments and wildcard expansion and so forth, while being able to
run at the same speed of execution as their SYS program counterparts in
time critical operations like graphics and floating point calculations.

Previous Updates and Brief History
----------------------------------

Since making AppleX available I have kept adding to it, but did not
update the AppleX readme file.

Website
-------

I also built a website called www.aztecmuseum.ca for AppleX and many other Aztec C compilers for other platforms, and time
permitting I have done my best to keep the website up to date.

Full Blown Aztec C Projects with Source Code
--------------------------------------------

After building the website, I made selected Full-Blown non-trivial
"Projects" in Aztec C65 part of the distribution. They are in the
PROJECTS direcory. Two of these projects (METOO and TIME) use overlays
and auxiliary memory extensively and should prove informative. I also
have 3 additional overlay projects that I will someday make available if
time permits.

Mixing the Old with the New
---------------------------

As I have done in the 2013 update with the PROGRAMS subdirectory, 
I kept these projects in the PROJECTS directory, separate from
the SAMPLES directory that comprised the first AppleX distribution.

I also provided DOSBox support for Aztec C65 and included this with
AppleX, not that it took me much work. With Windows 7 displacing WIndows
XP, it turns-out this was a good idea. Along the way I also tested in
Ubuntu in another DOS emulator, without problem. However I did not update
the ReadMe with any of this, while I just kept adding to AppleX. In fact 
I did not update the ReadMe at all.

When I first started resurrecting Aztec C compilers I learned quickly
about emulators, and quickly switched to the AppleWin emulator which I
would be a fool not to recommend. The Apple II Oasis emulator is getting
old, and crashes my new computer gloriously, and is pretty sparse
especially compared to the AppleWin (1.22) we enjoy today.

Ciderpress is an excellent disk manager. The Disk Manager in Apple II
Oasis has some quirks... it handles DOS 3.3 disks well except that it
will use lower-case naming which fouls DOS 3.3, but in either DOS 3.3 or
ProDOS 8 it beats Ciderpress in one respect... you can fill a disk with
multiple files then apply file-type sub-type/load attributes using a
batch select on the fly. Other than for some of my own specialized nits,
Cider Press is what I use continually these days as a disk manager for
Apple II disk images or to port programs to my real Apple IIe on a CF
(compact flash) card. Ciderpress supports this card (which inserts into a
device called a MicroDrive).

I have discovered through all this that there are many other options, my point being that the original Aztec C
ReadMe like much of my old stuff that is still included in AppleX is
quite dated and limited.

I am also mindful that there doesn't seem to be anything I can't do with
this old compiler except co-exist nicely with AppleSOft BASIC for ProDOS.
Aztec C and AppleX is not targeted at AppleSoft BASIC programming anyway.

Apple33 Aztec C65 for DOS 3.3
-----------------------------

Along the way, I also created a smaller distribution of Aztec C65
for building Apple II DOS 3.3 programs.   

Then for a couple of years or so, until Fall of 2012, I didn't do much
with AppleX or Apple33.

Permission to Distribute Aztec C65
----------------------------------

Someone pointed-out to me at some point that I have never indicated in
this distribution that I have permission to distribute Aztec C65. This
simply because I never updated the read me.

Copyright Clarification - Copyright and Conditions of Use 
---------------------------------------------------------

Harry Suckow (the Copyright holder for Aztec C) has given permission to
redistribute Manx Software Systems discontinued Aztec C compilers for
now-obsolete platforms.Your use must be Fair as it applies to Manx's
Copyright on these compilers. They are not for sale.

Bill Buckels
bbuckels@mts.net

End of ReadMe